
# SSD1306 Driver

The Solomon Systech [SSD1306](https://cdn-shop.adafruit.com/datasheets/SSD1306.pdf) is a monochrome OLED display, capable of displaying 128 x 64 pixels.  The SSD1306 is embedded in many ESP32 development boards, but can also supplied via a module for integration with your projects.

The `atomvm_lib` SSD1306 driver provides support for integrating SSD1306 displays with [AtomVM](https://github.com/bettio/AtomVM) applications running on the [ESP32](https://www.espressif.com/en/products/socs/esp32) devices.

> Note.  Testing has primarily utilized standalone SSD1306 modules.

The SSD1306 supports the 2-pin I2C interface, and the `atomvm_lib` SSD1306 driver makes use of this interface to communicate with the SSD1306 modem to display data.  Users may select any supported GPIO pins on your device to integrate with the module.

For more information about the ESP32 I2C interface, see the [ESP IDF SDK I2C documentation](https://docs.espressif.com/projects/esp-idf/en/latest/esp32/api-reference/peripherals/i2c.html).

# Programming Manual

The `atomvm_lib` SSD1306 driver is designed to provide a simple and easy to use interface for displaying textual or bitmap data for AtomVM applications.  This section describes the `atomvm_lib` SSD1306 driver API, as encapsulated in the `ssd1306` Erlang module.

## Lifecycle

An instance of the `atomvm_lib` SSD1306 driver is created via the `ssd1306:start/1` function.  This function takes a set of configuration, described in more detail below.

For example, to configure the 2-wire I2C interface to use the specified ESP32 pins, you can use the following configuration:

    %% erlang
    Config = #{
        sda_pin => 21,
        scl_pin => 22
    },
    {ok, Display} = ssd1306:start(Config),
    ...

The `SSD1306` instance can now be used for subsequent operations supported by the `ssd1306` module.

> Note.  For more information about the AtomVM I2C interface, see the AtomVM documentation.

To delete an instance of the driver, use the `ssd1306:stop/1` function.

    %% erlang
    ssd1306:stop(Display),
    ...

> Note.  This function is not well tested and its use may result in a memory leak.

## Configuration

The `atomvm_lib` SSD1306 driver is initialized with a map containing keys and values used to configure the driver.  The keys and values in this map are summarized in the following table:

| Key | Type | Required | Default Value | Description |
|-----|-------|----------|---------------|-------------|
| `sda_pin` | `non_negative_integer()` | yes  |  | ESP32 I2C SDA pin |
| `scl_pin` | `non_negative_integer()` | yes  |  | ESP32 I2C SCL pin |
| `freq_hz` | `non_negative_integer` | no  | `700000` | I2C clock frequency |
| `i2c_num` | `i2c_num_0 \| i2c_num_1` | no  | `i2c_num_0` | I2C hardware port.  Consult the IDF SDK documentation for more details. |

## Clearing the screen

To clear the screen use the `ssd1306:clear/1` function:

    %% erlang
    ok = ssd1306:clear(Display),
    ...

Clearing the screen will turn off (set to black) all pixels in the display.

## Writing text

To write text to the screen use the `ssd1306:set_text/2` function:

    %% erlang
    Text = io_lib:format(
        "  !!AtomVM!!~n~nFree heap:~n~p bytes",
        [erlang:system_info(esp32_free_heap_size)]
    ),
    ok = ssd1306:clear(Display),
    ok = ssd1306:set_text(Display, Text),
    ...

The SSD1306 driver is designed to support 16 columns and 8 rows of textual data on a standard 168 x 64 pixel OLED display.

> Note. Be sure to clear the screen using `ssd1306:clear/1` before writing text to the screen.

## Writing bitmaps

The SSD1306 driver can be used to write rectangular "bitmap" data, to display something vaguely image-like, if desired.

For the purposes of the driver, a "bitmap" is a sequence of bits encapsulated in an Erlang binary, representing a monochrome image, where a 1 bit indicating that a pixel should be on, and a 0 bit indicating that a pixel should be off.

The bit sequence represents the image in row-major format, with the high-order bit of the first byte representing the pixel at image position (`<x,y>`) `<0,0>`, the next bit in the first byte representing the pixel at position `<1,0>`, etc.  Given a rectangular image of pixel dimension `width` times `height`, there are therefore `width`-many bits in the initial bit sequence, representing the first row of the image, followed by the next row, and so forth, until all rows are represented in the binary.

Note that the sequences of width-many bits representing a row of the image generally may not be aligned on byte boundaries.  In addition, the `width * height` product may not be aligned on byte boundaries, as well.  In such a case, the remaining bits in the last byte of the boundary can be ignored, or padded with 0s, as desired.  In general, there will be `(width * height) div 8 + 1 if (width * height) rem 8 == 0` many bytes in a bitmap, given an image of size `width * height`.

The following illustrates the representation of a bitmap in an Erlang binary:

    +--------+--------+--------+--     --+-------    --------+--------+
    |01101011|00101110|11100110|11 ... 01|1100100 ... 1101001|11|00000|
    +--------+--------+--------+--     --+------- ... -------+--------+
     ^        ^        ^                    |                   | padding
     bit 0    bit 8    bit 12               |                   |
    |<---------------------------- ... ---->|<--- ... --------->|
    |       width-many bits                                     |
    |<---------------------------- ... ------------------------>|
    |               width * height -many bits
    |<---------------------------- ... ------------------------------>|
        (width * height) div 8 + 1 if (width * height) rem 8 == 0 (num bytes)

To write an image, use the `ssd1306:set_bitmap/4` function:

    %% erlang
    Bitmap = <<...>>,
    Width =  %% ...
    Height = %% ...
    ssd1306:set_bitmap(Display, Bitmap, Width, Height),
    ...


Note that the pixels outside of the image region are cleared when setting an image, so there is no need to use the `ssd1306:clear/1` function to clear any pixels already on the screen.

# SSD1306 Example

The `atomvm_lib` SSD1306 driver includes an example program illustrating use of the driver.  See the [README](../examples/ssd1306_example/README.md) for information about how to build, flash, and run this example program.
