## BME280 driver

The Bosch Sensortec BME280 is a small sensor that can read temperature, humidity, and atmospheric pressure.  The chipset supports I2C and SPI interfaces.  This driver uses the AtomVM I2C interface for communicating with the BME280.  This means you can take temperature, barometric pressure, and humidity readings using two GPIO pins on your ESP32.

Developers interact with this driver by starting an instance, specifying pins for the I2C data and clock pins.  Starting an instance of the driver yeilds a reference that can be used in subsequent calls.

The primary operation in this module is the take_reading/1 function, which takes a reference to a BME280 driver, and returns a reading expressed as a tuple containing the temperature (in degrees celcius), atomspheric pressure (in hectopascals) and relative humidity (as a percentage).

Functions for reading the BME280 chip ide and version, as well as doing a soft reset of the device, are also supported.

> Note.  The BME280 sensor is a fairly dynamic sensor and can be used for many different applications (e.g., weather collection, gaming, drones, etc). The primary use-case for this driver is weather collection, which is assumed to be a low frequency operation.  Some of the BME280 applications may require additional support in this driver, which would be relatively straightforward to support in future versions.

Further information about the Bosch Sensortec BME280 can be found in the reference documentation:

https://www.bosch-sensortec.com/media/boschsensortec/downloads/datasheets/bst-bme280-ds002.pdf

### Sample Code

The following code illustrates use of the high-level API:

    start() ->
        SDAPin = 21, SCLPin = 22,
        {ok, BME} = bme280:start(SDAPin, SCLPin),
        loop(BME).

    loop(BME) ->
        case bme280:take_reading(BME) of
            {ok, Reading} ->
                {Temperature, Pressure, Humidity} = Reading,
                io:format("Temperature: ~sC, Pressure: ~shPa, Humidity: ~s%RH~n", [
                    to_string(Temperature), to_string(Pressure), to_string(Humidity)
                ]);
            ErrorT ->
                io:format("Error taking reading temperature: ~p~n", [ErrorT])
        end,
        timer:sleep(5000),
        loop(BME).

    to_string({Integral, Fractional}) ->
        io_lib:format("~p.~p", [Integral, Fractional]).

### Example Program

The `bme280_example` program illustrates use of `bme280` module to retrieve temperature, atmospheric pressure, and humidity readings taken from the BME280 device attached to an ESP32 device.

* [Example](examples/bme280_example)
